gh-140374: Add glossary entries related to multithreading (#140375)
python/cpython: Doc/glossary.rst

      iterator's :meth:`~object.__anext__` method until it raises a
      :exc:`StopAsyncIteration` exception.  Introduced by :pep:`492`.

   atomic operation
      An operation that completes as a single indivisible unit without

>       interruption from other threads.  Atomic operations are critical for

Reviewer: I've seen "interrupt" in various definitions online, but I think "interrupt" is confusing in this context. I'm not really sure what it refers to here and the granularity of "atomic" vs. "interrupt" can be different. For example, a thread performing an atomic operation with locks can rescheduled (interrupted) by the OS without breaking atomicity. 

I like this definition (from ChatGPT):

An operation that appears to execute as a single, indivisible step: no other thread can observe it half-done, and its effects become visible all at once. Python does not guarantee that ordinary high-level statements are atomic (for example, x += 1 performs multiple bytecode operations and is not atomic). Atomicity is only guaranteed where explicitly documented (e.g., operations performed while holding a lock, or methods of synchronization primitives such as those in threading and queue).

      iterator's :meth:`~object.__anext__` method until it raises a
      :exc:`StopAsyncIteration` exception.  Introduced by :pep:`492`.

   atomic operation
      An operation that appears to execute as a single, indivisible step: no
      other thread can observe it half-done, and its effects become visible all
      at once.  Python does not guarantee that ordinary high-level statements
      are atomic (for example, ``x += 1`` performs multiple bytecode operations

>       and is not atomic).  Atomicity is only guaranteed where explicitly

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      at once.  Python does not guarantee that high-level statements
      are atomic (for example, ``x += 1`` performs multiple bytecode operations
      and is not atomic).  Atomicity is only guaranteed where explicitly
```

      iterator's :meth:`~object.__anext__` method until it raises a
      :exc:`StopAsyncIteration` exception.  Introduced by :pep:`492`.

   atomic operation
      An operation that completes as a single indivisible unit without
      interruption from other threads.  Atomic operations are critical for
      :term:`thread-safe` programming because they cannot be observed in a
      partially completed state by other threads.  In the

>       :term:`free-threaded <free threading>` build, elementary operations

Reviewer 3: Elementary operations is vague term and not properly defined. For example `list.append` and `set.add` both may be considered elementary however only the former is atomic in all cases.

Reviewer 2: Good catch @kumaraditya303. Do we simply want to delete that sentence since this is for the glossary.

Author: Deleted.

      advanced mathematical feature.  If you're not aware of a need for them,
      it's almost certain you can safely ignore them.

   concurrency
      The ability of different parts of a program to be executed out-of-order
      or in partial order without affecting the outcome.  This allows for
      multiple tasks to make progress during overlapping time periods, though
      not necessarily simultaneously.  In Python, concurrency can be achieved
      through :mod:`threading` (using OS threads), :mod:`asyncio` (cooperative
      multitasking), or :mod:`multiprocessing` (separate processes).
      See also :term:`parallelism`.

   concurrent modification
      When multiple threads modify shared data at the same time without
      proper synchronization.  Concurrent modification can lead to

>       :term:`data races <data race>` and corrupted data.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
      proper synchronization.  Concurrent modification cause
      :term:`race conditions <race condition>`, and might also trigger a 
      :term:`data race <data race>`, data corruption, or both.
```

I think concurrent modification without synchronization is a synonym for a race condition? So I want to link to that term in this term. I also think a data race doesn't necessarily imply data corruption, so I wanted to be a little more measured about that.

      advanced mathematical feature.  If you're not aware of a need for them,
      it's almost certain you can safely ignore them.

   concurrency
      The ability of different parts of a program to be executed out-of-order
      or in partial order without affecting the outcome.  This allows for
      multiple tasks to make progress during overlapping time periods, though
      not necessarily simultaneously.  In Python, concurrency can be achieved
      through :mod:`threading` (using OS threads), :mod:`asyncio` (cooperative
      multitasking), or :mod:`multiprocessing` (separate processes).

>       See also :term:`parallelism`.

Reviewer: I don't like the "out-of-order" definition. Concurrency is about things happening or being performed at the same time (in both computing and non-computing contexts).

Something like:

The ability of a computer program to perform multiple tasks at the same time. Python provides libraries for writing programs that make use of different forms of concurrency. :mod:`asyncio` is a library for dealing with asynchronous tasks and coroutines. :mod:`threading` provides access to operating system threads and :mod:`multiprocessing` to operating system processes. Multi-core processors can execute threads and processes on different CPU cores at the same time (see :term:`parallelism`).

Author: Using "at the same time" for both concurrency and parallelism is a bit confusing and may be misleading to some audiences though. Maybe rephrase the first sentence to "The ability of a computer program to perform multiple tasks during overlapping time periods" or does that sound confusing as well?

Reviewer: I still think the plain English "at the same time" is better. I'm not particularly concerned about trying to differentiate concurrency and parallelism -- I don't think we should devote any time to that discussion in the glossary. When people try to differentiate the two, it's usually with concurrency as the programming model (algorithm) and parallelism as the execution model (hardware). But the distinction is vague because one person's "execution model" is another person's "programming model" lower down in the stack....

In practice, the terms frequently used interchangeably in ways that "contradict" attempts to differentiate the two. We talk about "parallel algorithms" and "concurrent data structures"...

Reviewer: We also use "at the same time" (and "simultaneously") in English to refer to things that may not literally be at the same instant, whatever that really means. For example, a chess player giving a "simultaneous exhibition" is not literally moving pieces on multiple boards at the same time.

      advanced mathematical feature.  If you're not aware of a need for them,
      it's almost certain you can safely ignore them.

   concurrency
      The ability of different parts of a program to be executed out-of-order

>       or in partial order without affecting the outcome.  This allows for

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
      or in partial order without affecting the outcome.  This allows
```

      multiple tasks to make progress during overlapping time periods, though

>       not necessarily simultaneously.  In Python, concurrency can be achieved

Reviewer 2: @colesbury @lysnikolaou Perhaps:

```suggestion
      Different parts of a program may be executed in the same time period without affecting the outcome.  This allows for
      multiple tasks to make progress during the same time period, though
      not necessarily simultaneously.  In Python, concurrency can be achieved
```

Author: Defining a term without a "main" noun in the first sentence sounds doesn't sound great to me. Maybe use something other than "ability" instead?

Reviewer 4: Wikipedia uses "property". Merriam-webster uses "the occurence or existence". The OED uses "the fact".

I like "property" best I think?

Author: As in "The property of different parts of a program being able to executed at the same time" etc.?

Author: I ended up using Sam's suggestion below. I was convinced that "at the same time" is okay for the glossary.

      advanced mathematical feature.  If you're not aware of a need for them,
      it's almost certain you can safely ignore them.

   concurrency
      The ability of a computer program to perform multiple tasks at the same
      time.  Python provides libraries for writing programs that make use of
      different forms of concurrency.  :mod:`asyncio` is a library for dealing
      with asynchronous tasks and coroutines.  :mod:`threading` provides
      access to operating system threads and :mod:`multiprocessing` to
      operating system processes. Multi-core processors can execute threads and
      processes on different CPU cores at the same time (see
      :term:`parallelism`).

>    concurrent modification
>       When multiple threads modify shared data at the same time without
>       proper synchronization.  Concurrent modification can cause
>       :term:`race conditions <race condition>`, and might also trigger a
>       :term:`data race <data race>`, data corruption, or both.

Reviewer 5: Isn't the "without proper synchronization" unrelated to "concurrent modification"? Two threads may _concurrently modify_ a shared piece of memory _with proper synchronization_.

```suggestion
   concurrent modification
      When multiple threads modify shared data at the same time.
      Concurrent modification without proper synchronization can cause
      :term:`race conditions <race condition>`, and might also trigger a
      :term:`data race <data race>`, data corruption, or both.
```

      advanced mathematical feature.  If you're not aware of a need for them,
      it's almost certain you can safely ignore them.

   concurrency
      The ability of different parts of a program to be executed out-of-order
      or in partial order without affecting the outcome.  This allows for
      multiple tasks to make progress during overlapping time periods, though
      not necessarily simultaneously.  In Python, concurrency can be achieved
      through :mod:`threading` (using OS threads), :mod:`asyncio` (cooperative
      multitasking), or :mod:`multiprocessing` (separate processes).
      See also :term:`parallelism`.

   concurrent modification
      When multiple threads modify shared data at the same time without
      proper synchronization.  Concurrent modification can lead to
      :term:`data races <data race>` and corrupted data.  In the
      :term:`free-threaded <free threading>` build, built-in types like
      :class:`dict`, :class:`list`, and :class:`set` use internal locks

>       to protect against concurrent modifications.

Reviewer 4: Maybe it makes sense to talk about third-party extensions that might not necessarily prevent data races?

Reviewer 2: I think that may be better in documentation than in the glossary.

Reviewer 2: I think the data races glossary entry covers this.

      :keyword:`async with` keywords.  These were introduced
      by :pep:`492`.

>    critical section

Reviewer: I don't think we should define critical section, at least not for now. The way we use `Py_BEGIN_CRITICAL_SECTION` in the C API strays from the classical definition of a "critical section" because it can be suspended/interrupted.

I'd rather talk about those details in the C API docs instead of the Python glossary.

Author: Ok, let's remove it altogether.

      :keyword:`async with` keywords.  These were introduced
      by :pep:`492`.

   critical section
      A section of code that accesses shared resources and must not be

>       executed by multiple threads simultaneously.  Critical sections are

Reviewer 4: this should emphasize that critical sections are purely a concept in the C API and aren't exposed in the python language

>       executed by multiple threads simultaneously.  Critical sections are

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      executed by multiple threads simultaneously.  Critical sections are
      purely a concept in the C API and are not exposed in Python.
      Critical sections are
```

      the :term:`cyclic garbage collector <garbage collection>` is to identify these groups and break the reference
      cycles so that the memory can be reclaimed.

   data race

>       A situation where multiple threads access the same memory location
>       concurrently, at least one of the accesses is a write, and the threads
>       do not use any synchronization to control their access.  Data races

Reviewer 2: Maybe:

```suggestion
      When user code creates a situation where multiple threads access the same memory location
      concurrently, and at least one of the accesses is a write.  Data races
```

Author: I don't know how detailed we wanna be here, but data races are not only triggered from user code, but from implementation bugs as well.

Also "user code" is not very precise either, since extension module authors will be the ones triggering data races here, not Python end-users.

Reviewer 4: I like the text Lysandros has here. Maybe we can elaborate that data races in the CPython implementation are considered bugs but projects outside of CPython may have different approaches.

Author: I feel like the sentence `Note that data races can only happen in native code, but that :term:`native code` might be exposed in a Python API.` is enough information *for a glossary definition*.

      the :term:`cyclic garbage collector <garbage collection>` is to identify these groups and break the reference
      cycles so that the memory can be reclaimed.

>    data race

Reviewer: If we are only talking about native code (C or C++ or Rust or whatever), maybe we should leave this out of the glossary for now.

Author: Hmm, not sure about this. The fact that a program might be crashing because of a data race in native code affects Python programmers, so maybe it warrants at least an entry in the glossary. It'll also be nice to be able to link to this glossary entry from other places where we talk about data races.

Reviewer 4: One idea we had was for ecosystem documentation to link back here. In that context it'll really help.

Reviewer 5: Having both `data race` and `race condition` feels a bit redundant. Wouldn't ecosystem libraries be able to only refer to race conditions? 

Am I guessing correctly that here you want to distinguish between races that produce errors in application logic and races that produce a segfault or something low-level like that? If that's the case it might be useful when talking about bug reports, yes. But it might be a bit niche, hopefully?

Author: Extension modules can cause data races, so I feel it's appropriate to talk about both, especially since data races are undefined behavior.

      A situation where multiple threads access the same memory location
      concurrently, at least one of the accesses is a write, and the threads
      do not use any synchronization to control their access.  Data races
      lead to :term:`non-deterministic` behavior and can cause data corruption.
      Proper use of :term:`locks <lock>` and other :term:`synchronization primitives
      <synchronization primitive>` prevents data races.  Note that data races
      can only happen in native code, but that :term:`native code` might be
      exposed in a Python API.  See also :term:`race condition` and
      :term:`thread-safe`.

   deadlock
      A situation where two or more threads are unable to proceed because
      each is waiting for the other to release a resource.  For example,
      if thread A holds lock 1 and waits for lock 2, while thread B holds
      lock 2 and waits for lock 1, both threads will wait indefinitely.  Any
      program that makes blocking calls using more than one lock is possibly
      susceptible to deadlocks. Deadlocks can be avoided by always acquiring
      multiple :term:`locks <lock>` in a consistent order or by using

>       timeout-based locking.  See also :term:`lock` and :term:`reentrant`.

Reviewer: First sentence:

A situation in which two or more tasks (threads, processes, or coroutines) wait indefinitely for each other to release resources or complete actions, preventing any from making progress.

And maybe:

In Python this often arises from acquiring multiple locks in conflicting orders or from circular join()/await dependencies.

> Any
      program that makes blocking calls using more than one lock is possibly
      susceptible to deadlocks

This is too strong. 

> or by using timeout-based locking

I'd get rid of this. It may be true in some sense, but I don't know of a situation where that would actually be useful advice.

      the :term:`cyclic garbage collector <garbage collection>` is to identify these groups and break the reference
      cycles so that the memory can be reclaimed.

   data race
      A situation where multiple threads access the same memory location
      concurrently, at least one of the accesses is a write, and the threads
      do not use any synchronization to control their access.  Data races
      lead to :term:`non-deterministic` behavior and can cause data corruption.
      Proper use of :term:`locks <lock>` and other :term:`synchronization primitives
      <synchronization primitive>` prevents data races.  See also

>       :term:`race condition` and :term:`thread-safe`.

Reviewer 4: This should explain that data races are only possible via extensions and not via pure-python code.

Reviewer 2: We may want to keep the glossary entry generic since adding this may give the false impression that user code can not create a data race.

Author: I agree with @willingc that we should keep the glossary entries generic. I've removed references to APIs from other entries as well.

Reviewer 4: I still worry this is a little vague in terms of what precisely causes a data race and we can maybe make that clearer. Maybe we can include the fact that the read and write needs to be in low-level code, although the low-level issue might be triggered by a high-level Python API. 

It's certainly hard to be precise without being confusing to someone who isn't familiar with C extensions.

I worry that the current phrasing implies that two threads racing to update an attribute of a python class is a data race. But it's not, it's a race condition, and no data race happens because there is low-level synchronization in the CPython implementation. I realize the current definition includes this, but I worry that a reader might gather that "synchronization" is always via a `threading.Lock` or another Python API.

Author: How about "Note that data races can only happen in native code, but that native code might be exposed in a Python API"?

Reviewer 4: I like that, although maybe "native code" deserves an entry as well...

Author: Done.

   deadlock
      A situation where two or more threads are unable to proceed because
      each is waiting for the other to release a resource.  For example,
      if thread A holds lock 1 and waits for lock 2, while thread B holds
      lock 2 and waits for lock 1, both threads will wait indefinitely.
      Deadlocks can be avoided by always acquiring multiple :term:`locks <lock>`
      in a consistent order or by using timeout-based locking.  See also

>       :term:`lock` and :term:`reentrant`.

Reviewer 4: Maybe add "Any program that makes blocking calls using more than one lock is possibly susceptible to deadlocks."

      requires the GIL to be held in order to use it. This refers to having an
      :term:`attached thread state`.

   global state
      Data that is accessible throughout a program, such as module-level
      variables, class variables, or C static variables in :term:`extension modules
      <extension module>`.  In multi-threaded programs, global state shared
      between threads typically requires synchronization to avoid
      :term:`race conditions <race condition>` and
      :term:`data races <data race>`.  In the
      :term:`free-threaded <free threading>` build, :term:`per-module state`
      is often preferred over global state for C extension modules.

>       See also :term:`per-module state`.

Reviewer 4: maybe worth bringing up context variables as well?

Author: Maybe we should add an item for thread-local state instead?

      requires the GIL to be held in order to use it. This refers to having an
      :term:`attached thread state`.

   global state
      Data that is accessible throughout a program, such as module-level
      variables, class variables, or C static variables in :term:`extension modules
      <extension module>`.  In multi-threaded programs, global state shared
      between threads typically requires synchronization to avoid

>       :term:`race conditions <race condition>`. In the

Reviewer 4: Let's include both terms.

```suggestion
      :term:`race conditions <race condition>` and :term:`data races <data race>`. In the
```

      tuples.  Such an object cannot be altered.  A new object has to
      be created if a different value has to be stored.  They play an important
      role in places where a constant hash value is needed, for example as a key
      in a dictionary.  Immutable objects are inherently :term:`thread-safe`
      because their state cannot be modified after creation, eliminating concerns

>       about :term:`concurrent modification`.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
      about improperly synchronized :term:`concurrent modification`.
```

      clause is optional.  If omitted, all elements in ``range(256)`` are
      processed.

   lock
      A :term:`synchronization primitive` that allows only one thread at a
      time to access a shared resource.  A thread must acquire a lock before
      accessing the protected resource and release it afterward.  If a thread
      attempts to acquire a lock that is already held by another thread, it
      will block until the lock becomes available.  Python's :mod:`threading`
      module provides :class:`~threading.Lock` (a basic lock) and
      :class:`~threading.RLock` (a :term:`reentrant` lock).  Locks are used
      to prevent :term:`race conditions <race condition>` and ensure
      :term:`thread-safe` access to shared data.  See also

>       :term:`critical section`, :term:`deadlock`, and :term:`reentrant`.

Reviewer 4: IMO this deserves some discussion of the downsides of locks and should suggest designs that avoid locking via queues and producer/consumer patterns, thread-local state, or other approaches that avoid the need for shared state if at all possible.

Reviewer 2: Maybe add: "Alternative design patterns to locks exist such as queues, producer/consumer patterns, and thread-local state."

      See :term:`method resolution order`.

   mutable
      An :term:`object` with state that is allowed to change during the course
      of the program.  In multi-threaded programs, mutable objects that are
      shared between threads require careful synchronization to avoid

>       :term:`concurrent modification` issues.  See also :term:`immutable`,

Reviewer 5: To me it feels more correct to imply race conditions here.

```suggestion
      :term:`race conditions`.  See also :term:`immutable`,
```

Reviewer 5: Also, the previous definition was mentioning `id()`. Why not keep that? It might help newcomers make the connection and learn that they can check the `id(obj)` to know whether `obj` is shared. (Especially useful in debugging sessions.)

Author: Hmm, this is something we discussed with Nathan and we both agreed that using `id` to define mutable will confuse more people than it'll help. The advice about using `id` is a good one though, but maybe it best-positioned somewhere else?

>       :term:`concurrent modification` issues.  See also :term:`immutable`,

Reviewer 5: To me it feels better to imply race conditions here.

```suggestion
      :term:`race conditions`.  See also :term:`immutable`,
```

Reviewer 5: Also, the previous definition mentioned `id()`. Why not keep that? 

I think it would help newcomers make the connection that exists between aliasing and sharing. It's useful to check the `id(obj)` during a debugging session to learn that `obj` is actually shared between threads, even though another thread may be calling it `foo`, instead of `obj`.

      See :term:`method resolution order`.

   mutable
      Mutable objects can change their value but keep their :func:`id`.
      In multi-threaded programs, mutable objects that are shared between
      threads require careful synchronization to avoid :term:`concurrent modification`

>       issues.  See also :term:`immutable`, :term:`thread-safe`, and

Reviewer 4: The first sentence is a run-on and should be split into two. However, I think the text you inherited here is confusing and should perhaps be reworded to something like ``An :term:`object` with state that is allowed to change during the course of a program.`` The id of the object isn't really what's important and distracts from the main point: changing internal state

      See also :term:`module`.

   native code
      Code that is compiled to machine instructions and runs directly on the
      processor, as opposed to code that is interpreted or runs in a virtual
      machine.  In the context of Python, native code typically refers to

>       C, C++, Rust of Fortran code in :term:`extension modules <extension module>`

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
      C, C++, Rust or Fortran code in :term:`extension modules <extension module>`
```

      properties, :meth:`~object.__getattribute__`, class methods, and static
      methods.

   non-deterministic
      Behavior where the outcome of a program can vary between executions with
      the same inputs.  In multi-threaded programs, non-deterministic behavior
      often results from :term:`race conditions <race condition>` where the
      relative timing or interleaving of threads affects the result.
      :term:`Data races <data race>` are a common cause of non-deterministic

>       bugs.  Proper synchronization using :term:`locks <lock>` and other

Reviewer 4: I'm not sure I agree that data races are a common source of bugs in Python programs. At least for pure-python programs that don't use C extensions or only use C extensions that are thread-safe.

>       bugs.  Proper synchronization using :term:`locks <lock>` and other

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      the same inputs.  An example of non-deterministic behavior
      are :term:`race conditions <race condition>`.
      Proper synchronization using :term:`locks <lock>` and other
```

Author: I just removed the sentence @ngoldbaum mentioned. Does it read okay like this? I'd like to keep the mention of `relative timing` and `interleaving` in.

      See also :term:`regular package` and :term:`namespace package`.

   parallelism

>       The simultaneous execution of multiple operations on different CPU cores.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
      The simultaneous execution of operations on multiple processors.
```

To allow for GPUs

      See also :term:`regular package` and :term:`namespace package`.

   parallelism
      The simultaneous execution of multiple operations on different CPU cores.
      True parallelism requires multiple processors or processor cores and

>       allows operations to run at exactly the same time, not just interleaved.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      True parallelism requires multiple processors or processor cores where
      operations run at exactly the same time and are not just interleaved.
```

      In Python, the :term:`free-threaded <free threading>` build enables

>       parallelism for multi-threaded programs by removing the :term:`global

Reviewer 4: Not quite accurate since the GIL can be released. Maybe "parallelism for multi-threaded programs that access state stored in the interpreter".

      See also :term:`regular package` and :term:`namespace package`.

   parallelism
      The simultaneous execution of operations on multiple processors.
      True parallelism requires multiple processors or processor cores where
      operations run at exactly the same time and are not just interleaved.

>       In Python, the :term:`free-threaded <free threading>` build enables

Reviewer: Maybe something like:

Executing multiple operations at the same time (e.g., on multiple CPU cores). In Python builds with the `:term:`global interpreter lock` (GIL), only one thread runs Python bytecode at a time, so taking advantage of multiple CPU cores typically involves multiple processes (e.g., :term:`multiprocessing`) or native extensions that release the GIL. In :term:`free-threaded` Python, multiple Python threads can run Python code simultaneously on different cores.

      :class:`str` or :class:`bytes` result instead, respectively. Introduced
      by :pep:`519`.

   per-module state
      State that is stored separately for each instance of a module, rather
      than in :term:`global state`.  For :term:`extension modules <extension module>`

>       written in C, per-module state helps support multiple interpreters and

Reviewer 4: "written in C" isn't accurate - work is actively ongoing to make it easier to support multi-phase init and per-module state in PyO3 for Rust code.

Reviewer 2: I would remove the second sentence completely.

      :class:`str` or :class:`bytes` result instead, respectively. Introduced
      by :pep:`519`.

>    per-module state

Reviewer: Don't we elsewhere define global state as including per-module state?

Author: In global state we have:

```
Data that is accessible throughout a program, such as module-level
variables, class variables, or C static variables in :term:`extension modules
<extension module>`.  In multi-threaded programs, global state shared
between threads typically requires synchronization to avoid
:term:`race conditions <race condition>` and
:term:`data races <data race>`.  In the
:term:`free-threaded <free threading>` build, :term:`per-module state`
is often preferred over global state for C extension modules.
See also :term:`per-module state`.
```

      :class:`str` or :class:`bytes` result instead, respectively. Introduced
      by :pep:`519`.

   per-module state
      State that is stored separately for each instance of a module, rather
      than in :term:`global state`.  Per-module state is accessed through the
      module object rather than through C static variables.
      See :ref:`isolating-extensions-howto` for more information.  See also

>       :term:`global state`.

Reviewer 4: I kinda agree with Sam that this entry isn't worth adding. Also it's only true for heap modules. Per-module state in a static module is still global.

         >>> email.mime.text.__name__
         'email.mime.text'

   race condition

>       A flaw in the design or implementation of a program where the correctness

Reviewer 4: Are races always flaws? Sometimes it doesn't matter in which order something happens or which thread happens to complete an operation.

Reviewer 2: Let's rewrite the first sentence. Focus on relative timing and ordering of events.

      See also :term:`namespace package`.

   reentrant
      A property of a function or :term:`lock` that allows it to be called or
      acquired multiple times by the same thread without causing errors or a
      :term:`deadlock`.

      For functions, reentrancy means the function can be safely called again
      before a previous invocation has completed, which is important when

>       functions may be called recursively or from signal handlers.

Reviewer 4: somewhere in the above two paragraphs you should link to the term for non-deterministic behavior and say that thread-unsafe functions may be non-deterministic if you call them reentrantly in a multithreaded program

      See also :term:`borrowed reference`.

   synchronization primitive
      A basic building block for coordinating the execution of multiple threads
      to ensure :term:`thread-safe` access to shared resources.  Python's
      :mod:`threading` module provides several synchronization primitives
      including :class:`~threading.Lock`, :class:`~threading.RLock`,
      :class:`~threading.Semaphore`, :class:`~threading.Condition`,
      :class:`~threading.Event`, and :class:`~threading.Barrier`.  Additionally,
      the :mod:`queue` module provides multi-producer, multi-consumer queues

>       that are especially usedul in multithreaded programs. These

Reviewer 4: useful

      See also :term:`borrowed reference`.

   synchronization primitive

>       A basic building block for coordinating the execution of multiple threads

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
      A basic building block for coordinating (synchronizing) the execution of multiple threads
```

>       A basic building block for coordinating the execution of multiple threads

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
      A basic building block for coordinating (synchronizing) the execution of multiple threads
```

      See also :term:`borrowed reference`.

   synchronization primitive
      A basic building block for coordinating the execution of multiple threads
      to ensure :term:`thread-safe` access to shared resources.  Python's
      :mod:`threading` module provides several synchronization primitives
      including :class:`~threading.Lock`, :class:`~threading.RLock`,
      :class:`~threading.Semaphore`, :class:`~threading.Condition`,

>       :class:`~threading.Event`, and :class:`~threading.Barrier`.  These

Reviewer 4: I'd include the `queue` module too.

      See :ref:`Thread State and the Global Interpreter Lock <threads>` for more
      information.

   thread-safe
      Code that functions correctly when accessed by multiple threads
      concurrently.  Thread-safe code uses appropriate
      :term:`synchronization primitives <synchronization primitive>` like
      :term:`locks <lock>` to protect shared mutable state, or is designed
      to avoid shared mutable state entirely.  In the
      :term:`free-threaded <free threading>` build, built-in types like
      :class:`dict`, :class:`list`, and :class:`set` use internal locking

>       to provide thread-safe operations, though this doesn't guarantee safety

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
      to make many operations thread-safe, although thread safety is not necessarily guaranteed
```

The way you have this line now is a little confusing IMO, since it says that everything is thread-safe, but no guarantees. I think the way I rephrased it here is correct and leaves it a little clearer that lots of stuff is thread-safe but there are exceptions.

When eventually we have a full listing of what exactly is thread-safe and thread-unsafe in the APIs of the builtins, we can link to that here, maybe?

      See :ref:`Thread State and the Global Interpreter Lock <threads>` for more
      information.

   thread-safe

>       A module, function, or class that behaves correctly when used by multiple
>       threads concurrently.  Thread-safe code uses appropriate
>       :term:`synchronization primitives <synchronization primitive>` like
>       :term:`locks <lock>` to protect shared mutable state, or is designed
>       to avoid shared mutable state entirely.  In the
>       :term:`free-threaded <free threading>` build, built-in types like
>       :class:`dict`, :class:`list`, and :class:`set` use internal locking
>       to make many operations thread-safe, although thread safety is not
>       necessarily guaranteed.  Code that is not thread-safe may experience
>       :term:`race conditions <race condition>` and :term:`data races <data race>`
>       when used in multi-threaded programs.

Reviewer 5: I think this one's very tricky, definitely because thread-safe in itself is very vague.

I took a look at [my uni textbook on concurrency](https://dl.acm.org/doi/book/10.5555/2385452) and couldn't find a definition of thread-safe. (I checked, it actually never mentions `thread-safe` or `thread safe`.) And I think that's because what thread-safe means fundamentally depends on the semantics of an application.

Is it thread-safe to call `my_list[0] += 1`, assuming `my_list` is shared? It depends. And that's why there is this unsatisfactory line here:

```rst
[...] built-in types like
:class:`dict`, :class:`list`, and :class:`set` use internal locking
to make many operations thread-safe, although thread safety is not
necessarily guaranteed.
```

Maybe we can turn the problem around and only define thread-safety as the absence of thread-unsafety?

```suggestion
      A module, function, or class that behaves correctly when used by multiple
      threads concurrently.  Thread-safe code uses appropriate
      :term:`synchronization primitives <synchronization primitive>` like
      :term:`locks <lock>` to protect shared mutable state, or is designed
      to avoid shared mutable state entirely.  Code that is not thread-safe may experience
      :term:`race conditions <race condition>` and :term:`data races <data race>`
      when used in multi-threaded programs.
```

Author: Yes, talking about thread-safety is always bound to be vague. Having said that, the sentence about `dict`, `list` and `set` feels like it's okay since it doesn't necessarily make any statement, but makes the reader understand that there's subtlety there which they can found out more about in other places in the docs.

      See :ref:`Thread State and the Global Interpreter Lock <threads>` for more
      information.

   thread-safe
      Code that functions correctly when accessed by multiple threads

>       concurrently.  Thread-safe code uses appropriate

Reviewer: I'd like to rework the first sentence a bit. We talk about thread-safe modules and data structures (classes), not just "code"

Maybe something like:

A module, function, or class that behaves correctly when used by multiple threads concurrently.

      See :ref:`Thread State and the Global Interpreter Lock <threads>` for more
      information.

   thread-safe
      A module, function, or class that behaves correctly when used by multiple
      threads concurrently.  Thread-safe code uses appropriate
      :term:`synchronization primitives <synchronization primitive>` like
      :term:`locks <lock>` to protect shared mutable state, or is designed
      to avoid shared mutable state entirely.  In the
      :term:`free-threaded <free threading>` build, built-in types like
      :class:`dict`, :class:`list`, and :class:`set` use internal locking
      to make many operations thread-safe, although thread safety is not
      necessarily guaranteed.  Code that is not thread-safe may experience
      :term:`race conditions <race condition>` and :term:`data races <data race>`

>       when used in multi-threaded programs.

Reviewer 4: It might be worth drawing a distinction between a thread-safe operation and an atomic operation. Also maybe worth adding that often it comes down to whether the order of operations impacts the result.

Author: > It might be worth drawing a distinction between a thread-safe operation and an atomic operation.

The problem I see with that is that we define thread-safety as a property of a module, function or class, while atomicity has to do with indivisible operations only. Maybe we should say something like:

```
All :term:`atomic` operations are thread-safe and a thread-safe algorithm
might use :term:`atomic` operations as a means of ensuring exclusive data access.
```

But even this feels more than what's needed.

> Also maybe worth adding that often it comes down to whether the order of operations impacts the result.

I'm not sure how we could phrase that in a way that's helpful and not overly detailed. Any ideas?

Reviewer 4: I agree, withdrawn.
